I spent most of my adult life not knowing how to take care of myself. In childhood, I took myself (and parents, siblings, people around us) for granted. Starting to date eventually taught me to take care of my dates, then taking care of my wife after marriage, and subsequently the children. Seldom do we learn to put our own needs first. In fact, we describe this as being "selfish", a word with strong negative taste.

Sure, we might spend some nights out with the boys, getting drunk. We might take up a sport, go for massage once in a while. But I know that lots of people like me would feel guilty of the time we spend on ourselves, especially if we are not working extra long hours to provide for our loved ones, or to spend enough time to connect with them. Most of our times with our loved ones are crowded with duties and chores.

The counter-intuitive fact that I learned is that to better take care of our loved ones, to spend more quality time with them, we must first take the time to take care of ourselves. It's like the announcement we've heard many times at the start of a flight: "Put the oxygen mask on yourself first". You will not be doing your dependences any favours if you are incapacitated or operating at lower efficiency. There's a limit if you're always giving without replenishment. By working on yourself, you can give more effectively.

When I started putting aside time to think about my health, work on my fitness, meditate, shop for ingredients and prepare my own food, my body and mind becomes a more efficient engine, which in turn allows me to not only have more time to spend with my family,  but also to spend the time more effectively with them. 